We computed the significance of the overlap between the breakpoint regions and a set of possible features of interest. Features of interest included genes, segmental duplications, and repeats of the following types: Alu, LINE, ERV, SVA. We also tested two sets of features relating to methylation and chromatin structure: open chromatin regions in human embryonic stem cells (OCRs) reported by the ENCODE consortium, and two sets of "methylation deserts" defined as the 100kb regions in the lowest and five lowest percentiles of methylation in the human germline (MD1 and MD5) as recently published by Li et al. (2012). Repeat elements were extracted from the rmsk table downloaded from the UCSC Genome Browser for human build hg19. OCRs were identified using the track wgEncodeOpenChromSynthH1hescPk for hg19.

We use three metrics to measure overlap between the breakpoint regions and each feature of interest. The first was the number of breakpoint regions that overlapped with at least one feature. The second was the number of features that overlapped with a breakpoint region. The final metric was the number of base pairs of overlap between breakpoint regions and features.

To determine the signficance of these metrics we used a permutation approach. While maintaining the chromsomal assignment and length of breakpoint regions, we permuted their start coordinates 10,000 times using BEDTools version 2.16.2 (Quinlan and Hall, 2010). Locations of the features were held constant. We then compared the results of our three metrics to the observed distribution of results from the randomly permuted regions, and used the quantile of the real observed value in that distribution as an estimate of the p-value of observing a value greater than the real observation. Estimated p-values were computed in the R programming language and plotted using the ggplot2 library (Wickham 2009).

We conducted each of these tests against each feature using the entire set of breakpoint regions, as well with subsets broken down by the genera in which they were observed. These subsets were: those common to all genera (Common), NLE, SSY, HLE, and those which were observed in a subset of all of the genera (Intermediate). This resulted in 6 sets of breakpoints and 9 sets of features for a total of 54 tests of signficance. We therefore applied a Bonferroni correction for multiple testing and 

Li, J., Harris, R. A., Cheung, S. W., Coarfa, C., Jeong, M., Goodell, M. A., White, L. D., et al. (2012). Genomic Hypomethylation in the Human Germline Associates with Selective Structural Mutability in the Human Genome. PLoS genetics, 8(5), e1002692. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1002692 

Quinlan, A. R., & Hall, I. M. (2010). BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England), 26(6), 841–842. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq033

H. Wickham. ggplot2: elegant graphics for data analysis. Springer New York, 2009.
